The intention of this brief project is to help people understand the culture, the commitment,
the sacrifice, the contribution of people who were from that village in Cardiff called
Tiger Bay, Bute Town, Cardiff Docks, and to maybe have an understanding about just how
committed they were because they remain there or they remain Welsh to this day. Firstly
let me say on behalf of HTA thank you to Herridge's Lottery for supporting us so we were able to
undertake this brief project during an extremely messy time of Covid and it I have to say would
have been a lot easier otherwise but nonetheless thank you to Herridge's Lottery. In the June of
1919 when Tiger Bay and Bute Town were attacked by white mobs over a number of days the press
coverage the reaction of the minister the appropriate minister which was Winston Churchill
was very notable the blame was directed towards the residents of Tiger Bay who were attacked by
white mobs which meant their actions in trying to save their homes their businesses actually much
more importantly their families from the mob were self-defense. Now we looked at what happened in
court and I have to say been surprised because the courts attitude and the police the attitude of
the police because witness statements from the police are very clear about where they lay the
blame from serving police officers let me say this is not the chief constable this is serving
police officers the attitude was a surprise the decisions in court were legally correct without
any doubt but also were very clear in punishing the white the ten white men who were arrested
and charged by the police were all punished the treatment received by the black and other diverse
community representatives people who were arrested by the police was actually very very fair. Black
men in court that's Afro-Caribbean Arab mainly and African black men found guilty in Swansea
court as a result of their role in the Cardiff riots well despite 15 men being taken to court
some with very obvious injuries the court acted in a reasonable and fair way towards them the
press may have placed all the blame on the black people of Bute Town and Grangetown but the court
did not the offences punished were largely unavoidable in terms of punishment they were
mainly gun related in relation to violence towards the police and shooting directly into
the crowd black men found guilty were Mohammed Ali Ali Abdul Iver Gabriel Lenzman and Mohammed
Qayyid also known as Ahmed Qalad so only four men were found guilty others found not guilty
all no evidence presented were Ismail Mohammed Cham Ali Saleh Abdullah Saeed Ben Saeed Farah
Mohammed Mohammed Hassan John Tucker Mohammed Sharif Issa Mohammed Mohammed Abderi and John
Abdullah so the black the four black men who found guilty was sentenced to prison in Swansea court
the four men were as I say Ali Abdul was age 26 a fireman on the merchant ships he was given four
days imprisonment for assaulting Frederick Gregory a police constable I should add he'd
already been in prison for nearly seven weeks sub waiting trial Iver Gabriel Lenzman was age 21
a ship's cook and he was given a three-year prison sentence for shooting at Sydney Jones
William Clark and James Coombs Ahmed Qalad known also as Mohammed Qayyid age 25 a ship's
donkeyman was given 15 months hard labor for shooting at John Porter a police constable
Mohammed Ali age 27 was given three months hard labor for shooting at Henry Brotherton and Ernest
May except for John Abdullah who is listed as a shopkeeper but was also a boarding house owner
all of the black men were in the merchant Navy at the time of the riots and therefore it's extremely
likely that they were also involved in World War one now thanks to the Cardiff Story Museum
we know that a number of people were compensated for loss of goods and damage during the riots
the bulk of those being in Bute town some of these were among the men that appeared in court
the figures I'm going to quote show the actual amount received and the modern equivalent in 2017
according to the National Archives in London Mohammed Ali now he was found guilty in court
and was sentenced three months hard labor nonetheless he received sixty pounds sixty
seven pounds ten shillings compensation a modern equivalent of a thousand one thousand nine hundred
sixty one pounds and so we can understand that in a real context what we're also going to do is quote
what that meant if you were a skilled tradesman that's the high level of salary so that would
have been 204 days wages for a skilled tradesman at that time John Tucker received 30 pounds that's
the equivalent to in 2017 of 886 pounds 26 pence 92 days wages Mohammed Sharif received 14 pounds
421 pounds 34 in 2017 money and 43 days wages at the time now John Abdullah who owned a shop
and boarding house which was the center of a lot of the damage received 175 pounds now that's the
equivalent of just over five thousand pounds and it was 531 days wages is a Mohammed received 12
pounds 348 pounds equivalent which is the equivalent of 36 days wages Ishmael Mohammed
received seven pounds 203 pounds 14 2017 and 21 days wages Sayyid bin Sayyid received four pound
116 pounds 23 equivalent and 12 days wages Fahra Mohammed received five pound 145 pounds 29 equivalent
and 15 days wages Sali Abdullah received six pound the equivalent of 174 pounds 35
18 days wages and Mohammed Hassan received five pound the equivalent 145 pounds 29 and 15 days wages
so although the events were savage and caused some serious physical injury to the black merchant
seaman the treatment they received in court reflected the fact that they did not start the
riot also the compensation amounts were significant at that time so despite the press consistently
for most of June placing the blame for the Cardiff riots on black people living in Cardiff that was
not the conclusion reached by the court and they received compensation for loss of belongings and
damage to property it's interesting to note that even that these events occurred 20 years before
the start of world war one world war two and despite racist attacks brutality by white mobs
and overt threat to their families these black people returned to the sea in world war two to
assist britain in world war two at least 645 arab merchant seamen serving on the britches navy
merchant navy died of the 479 men who listed their last known address 242 sailed out of wales
30 from barry 12 from swansea 10 from newport 189 from cardiff our research shows that 330
men born in the caribbean died serving on the uk merchant navy in world war two 56 of those
listed their last known address as wales three from newport 11 from barry and 42 from cardiff
these men left at least 35 wives behind in wales also there were sisters daughters brothers and
mothers listed in next of kin now this shows that the riots racism attacks failure of government
unions and others to support men none of this changed their commitment to settling in wales
and becoming black citizens in an often unfriendly environment this is really important
because for those of us who are black but of mixed race
third generation nowadays and fourth and fifth generation the statement of intent made by those
people during and after the 1919 race riots after having been involved in world war one
and after a tremendous loss of life in world war one within their community
that statement is why we're citizens of wales today